Dear Dr. Park,

Thank you and your fellow investigators for your proposal submission to the National Marine Fisheries Service Advanced Sampling Technology Working Group (ASTWG).  The ASTWG received proposals requesting a total of 1.1 million dollars.  We are pleased to announce that the proposal you submitted entitled, “Improving techniques for estimating abundance and habitat use in nearshore marine habitats using environmental DNA.” has been selected for FY17 funding depending on the final budgetary decision to be made within the next 2-3 months. Please standby for notification on when funds will be transferred to your Center.
  
The proposed work was well-described, exciting, and innovative.  Although the ASTWG considered research in this area as having a relatively high risk for success, the Group also considered that development of the proposed method could result in an extremely valuable new tool to address a number of stock assessment needs if successful.  The Panel noticed and appreciated that the PIs were cognizant of the potential limitations of the method and did not simply gloss over these concerns.  Rather, the proposal included a number of statements acknowledging potential shortcomings of the approach as well as thoughts on how to minimize these concerns.  Although this was considered a strong proposal by the ASTWG, the inclusion of researchers from other NOAA Science Centers as collaborators would further highlight the view that the proposed work could have national relevance for NOAA.

Several issues were raised in ASTWG discussions to evaluate this proposal which should be considered by the PIs during the course of their study (e.g., progress report).   Details of the field sampling plan were inadequate and should include more than essentially, “spring and summer.” How many samples are anticipated to be needed from each area and at what frequency to meet the study objectives?  It would have also been helpful if more details of the “newly developed Bayesian statistical framework”  were presented in the proposal, besides simply citing Shelton et al (2016).  Figure 2 on page 10 seems to indicate that one can not differentiate from live and dead salmon.  Does this have implications to your study objects? Also, can one distinguish DNA in fecal material from other material?

Nonetheless, we again want to stress that the group was very supportive of the work, and look forward to your progress report.  

Sincerely,


Chris Wilson

ASTWG Chair